.\"
.\"     include-tidy -- #include tidier
.\"     include-tidy.5 manual page
.\"
.\"     Copyright (C) 2026  Paul J. Lucas
.\"
.\"     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" define code-start macro
.de cS
.sp
.nr cS_ps \n[.ps]                       \" save current point size
.ps -1                                  \" shrink it
.nf
.RS 5
.ft CW
..
.\" define code-end macro
.de cE
.ft 1
.RE
.fi
.ps \n[cS_ps]                           \" restore original size
.if !'\\$1'0' .sp
..
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH \f3include-tidy\fP 5 "April 5, 2026" "PJL TOOLS"
.SH NAME
include-tidy.toml \(em \f(CW#include\fP tidier configuration file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B include-tidy.toml
file is used to configure
.BR include-tidy (1).
The file is ``lite'' version of TOML.
(See
.B CAVEATS
for unsupported TOML.)
.SS Tables
The file is broken down into sections
(``tables'' in TOML parlance)
where each section is started by a line of the form:
.P
.RS 5
.RI [ table-name ]
.RE
.P
that is a left bracket,
a table name,
and a right bracket.
There must be
.I no
whitespace between the brackets.
If a table name
contains a character other than
a valid TOML key character of
\f(CW[A-Za-z0-9_-.]\fP
(a letter, digit, underscore, dash, or dot),
then the table name
.I must
be quoted.
.PP
The order in which tables are given
doesn't matter.
For the keys below,
a value
.I b
means Boolean
(either \f(CWtrue\fP
or \f(CWfalse\fP),
.I f
means a quoted file's relative path,
.I n
means an unsigned integer,
and
.I s
means a quoted string.
.SS include-tidy Table
This table
.I must
be named
.B include-tidy
and is used to specify options,
some the same as can be specified
via the command-line,
but without having to specify them
via the command-line
every time.
.TP 5
.BI align-column " \f1=\fP n"
Same as the
.B \-\-align-column
command-line option.
.TP
.BI all-includes " \f1=\fP b"
Same as the
.B \-\-all-includes
command-line option.
.TP
.BI comment-style " \f1=\fP s"
Same as the
.B \-\-comment-style
command-line option.
.TP
.BI line-length " \f1=\fP n"
Same as the
.B \-\-line-length
command-line option.
.TP
.BI std-c-includes " \f1=\fP " [ s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
One or more include files,
that are specified as a bracket-enclosed,
comma-separated
array of strings,
are to be considered ``standard'' C include files.
These are used
when the source file
is either C or C++
(since C++ programs
can include C header files).
.TP
.BI std-cpp-includes " \f1=\fP " [ s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
One or more include files,
that are specified as a bracket-enclosed,
comma-separated
array of strings,
are to be considered ``standard'' C++ include files.
These are used
only when the source file
is C++
(since C programs
can not include C++ header files).
.SS Header Tables
This type of table specifies
a relative path of an include file
(what you would put between either the \f(CW""\fP
or \f(CW<>\fP
in an \f(CW#include\fP directive),
e.g.,
\f(CWstdio.h\fP
or
\f(CWsys/wait.h\fP.
.TP 5
.BI first " \f1=\fP b"
If true,
the local include file given for the table name
is to be printed first,
i.e., before any other local include files.
This is useful when
.B all-includes
is \f(CWtrue\fP.
.TP
.BI keep " \f1=\fP b"
If true,
the include file given for the table name
is to be ``kept,''
that is,
even if no symbols from it are referenced
and so is apparently unnecessary,
it will not be reported as a violation.
.TP
.BI proxy " \f1=\fP s" "\f1 | \fP[" s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Specifies that the include file
given for the table name
is a ``proxy''
for one other include file
(that can be specified as a single string)
or one or more other include files
that are specified as a bracket-enclosed,
comma-separated
array of strings.
For example,
this:
.RS 5
.cS
[pjl_config.h]
proxy = [
    "attribute.h",
    "config.h"
]
.cE 0
.RE
.IP
says the header \f(CWpjl_config.h\fP
is a proxy for both \f(CWattribute.h\fP
and \f(CWconfig.h\fP
meaning that all symbols declared in either of those files
are considered declared in \f(CWpjl_config.h\fP instead.
Therefore,
if a source file includes \f(CWpjl_config.h\fP,
it does not need to include either of the files
for which it is a proxy.
.TP
.BR symbols " \f1=\fP s" "\f1 | \fP[" s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Specifies that the include file
given for the name table
is to be considered
to declare the given symbols.
.SS Symbol Tables
This type of table specifies a symbol name,
e.g.,
\f(CWNULL\fP
or
\f(CWsize_t\fP,
is declared in multiple include files
so including any one of them
meets the
.I include-what-you-use
requirement
thus averting a violation.
.TP 5
.BR includes " \f1=\fP s" "\f1 | \fP[" s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Specifies that the symbol
given for the table name
is to be considered declared
in one or more
of the include files listed.
For example,
this:
.RS 5
.cS
[NULL]
includes = [
    "locale.h",
    "stddef.h",
    "stdio.h",
    "stdlib.h",
    "string.h",
    "time.h",
    "wchar.h",
]
.cE 0
.RE
.IP
says that \f(CWNULL\fP
is declared in
.I all
of those files
so including any
.I one
of them is sufficient.
.SH CAVEATS
.SS Unsupported TOML
The following parts of TOML are
.I not
supported
because they aren't needed
to configure
.BR include-tidy (1):
.sp
.PD 0
.IP \(bu 3
Array of tables.
.IP \(bu
Dates or times.
.IP \(bu
Floating-point numbers.
.IP \(bu
Inline tables.
.IP \(bu
UTF-8.
.PD
.SH AUTHOR
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR include-tidy (1)
.\" vim:set et sw=2 ts=2:
