.\"
.\"     include-tidy -- #include tidier
.\"     include-tidy.1: manual page
.\"
.\"     Copyright (C) 2026  Paul J. Lucas
.\"
.\"     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" define code-start macro
.de cS
.sp
.nr cS_ps \n[.ps]                       \" save current point size
.ps -1                                  \" shrink it
.nf
.RS 5
.ft CW
..
.\" define code-end macro
.de cE
.ft 1
.RE
.fi
.ps \n[cS_ps]                           \" restore original size
.if !'\\$1'0' .sp
..
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH \f3include-tidy\fP 1 "April 10, 2026" "PJL TOOLS"
.SH NAME
include-tidy \(em \f(CW#include\fP tidier
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B include-tidy
.BI "[-Xtidy " tidy-option ]...
.BI [ clang-option ]...
.I source-file
.br
.B include-tidy
.I other-option
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B include-tidy
is a command-line tool
that can be used to ``tidy'' the
\f(CW#include\fP directives
used in a C
or C++
source file
by enforcing the
.I include-what-you-use
principle,
namely that a source file
directly includes
header files from which it references symbols
and does not include header files
from which it does not reference symbols.
A source file that is either
missing a direct
or unnecessary
\f(CW#include\fP
is in ``violation.''
.PP
By default,
a missing \f(CW#include\fP is printed
followed by a comment
aligned at a specific column
containing a sorted,
comma-separated
list of as many symbols
referenced from it
as will fit into
the current line length.
(See the
.B \-\-align-column
or
.BR \-a ,
.B \-\-comment-style
or
.BR \-s ,
and the
.B \-\-line-length
or
.BR \-l
options
that control comments.)
.PP
An unnecessary \f(CW#include\fP is printed
followed by a comment
containing a recommendation
to delete the line number.
.SS Use with Make
While
.B include-tidy
can be run on a per-file basis,
it can alternatively be used with
.BR make (1)
in place of either your C
or C++
compiler.
In your
.BR Makefile ,
have:
.cS
TIDY_FLAGS = -Xtidy --verbose=f -Xtidy --error=never

tidy:
        @touch *.c
        @$(MAKE) -s CC="include-tidy" CFLAGS="$(TIDY_FLAGS)"
.cE
then simply
.B make tidy
to tidy all your source files
at once.
(For C++,
substitute
\f(CW.cpp\fP for \f(CW.c\fP,
.B CXX
for
.BR CC ,
and
.B CXXFLAGS
for
.BR CFLAGS .)
.PP
The advantage of doing this
is that
.B include-tidy
will be given all the options
normally given to your compiler
via your
.BR Makefile ,
specifically
.B \-D
(define macro)
and
.B \-I
(include directory)
options
that affect compilation.
.PP
The
.B \-\-verbose=f
says to print each source file's name
and the
.B \-\-error=never
says always to exit with a zero status
even for violations so
.B make
doesn't think anything went wrong.
The
.B @
suppresses echoing of the commands,
the
.B touch
is needed so
.B make
will run
.B include-tidy
on all \f(CW.c\fP files,
and the
.B \-s
or
.B \-\-silent
suppresses
.BR make 's
output.
(See the
.B \-\-error
and
.B \-\-verbose
options below.)
.SS Proxies
Headers often include other headers because:
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
They reference symbols from it.
.IP \n+[step].
They hide ``implementation'' headers
that users should not include directly.
For example,
\f(CWfoo.h\fP,
on an Intel platform,
might include \f(CWx86_64/foo.h\fP;
but on an ARM platform,
might include \f(CWarm64/foo.h\fP.
.IP \n+[step].
They aggregate headers for user convenience.
For example,
the Clang C library
provides \f(CWIndex.h\fP
that includes all other library headers
so users can simply include it
and not have to include other headers individually.
.PP
For cases 2 and 3,
the including header
can be considered a
``proxy'' header
and the user is expected
simply to include it
when referencing any symbol
declared by either it
or any header it includes.
However,
a tool such as
.B include-tidy
has no way to know which headers
should be considered proxies.
.PP
For system headers,
all headers given via both
.B std-c-includes
and
.B std-cpp-includes
(see
.BR "include-tidy Table" )
are considered implicit proxies
for any other system headers
they might include.
For user headers,
.B proxy
(see
.BR "Header Tables" )
can be used to specify an explicit proxy.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Option Kinds
.B include-tidy
has three kinds of command-line options:
.sp
.PD 0
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
.BR include-tidy -specific
options.
.IP \n+[step].
.BR clang (1)
options.
.IP \n+[step].
Other options.
.PD
.SS Include-Tidy-Specific Options
Every
.BR include-tidy -specific
option
.I must
be preceded by an
.B -Xtidy
option to distinguish it from a
.BR clang (1)
option.
For example,
in:
.cS
include-tidy -Xtidy --all-includes -I../lib source.c
.cE
the
.BR \-\-all-includes
option
is given only to
.B include-tidy
and the
.B -I../lib
option is given only to
.BR clang (1).
.PP
For the options below,
an option argument
.I f
means
.IR file ,
.I n
means
.IR "unsigned integer" ,
and
.I s
means
.IR string .
.TP 5
.BR \-\-align-column \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-a " n"
Sets the column at which to align comments
after \f(CW#include\fP directives.
The default is 40.
.TP
.BR \-\-all-includes " | " \-A
Prints all include files,
not just those in violation.
Local includes
are printed before system includes.
The include corresponding to the current
\f(CW.c\fP or \f(CW.cpp\fP
is printed first.
.TP
.BR \-\-clang \f1=\fPf "\f1 | \fP" "" \-C " f"
Specifies the path to
.BR clang (1)
to use;
or
.B none
not to use
.B clang
in which case
paths to system include directories
must be specified explicitly
via either
.B -I
or
.B -isystem
options.
.TP
.BR \-\-color \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-k " s"
Sets when to colorize output to
.I s
(which is case-insensitive).
(See the
.B INCLUDE_TIDY_COLORS
environment variable about colorization.)
The choices for
.I s
are:
.RS
.TP 8
.B always
Always colorize.
.TP
.BR auto " | " isatty " | " tty
Colorize only when standard output
or error
is connected to a TTY
(terminal).
.TP
.B never
Never colorize.
.TP
.BR not_file " | " not_isreg
Colorize only when
.I not
writing to a regular file
(hence writing to a TTY or pipe).
(Specifically,
.BR fstat (3)
is called on standard output
and error:
colorize only if \f(CWS_IFREG\fP is false.)
.IP
This is more useful than
.B isatty
since it accommodates the common case of allowing color output to be piped to
.BR less (1)
and still display in color since
.B less
understands
.I SGR
(``Select Graphic Rendition'')
ASCII terminal escape sequences
that produce color.
.RE
.IP
The default is
.BR not_file .
.TP
.BR \-\-comment-style \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-s " s"
Specifies the comment style to use,
one of \f(CW//\fP,
\f(CW/*\fP,
or
\f(CWnone\fP.
The default is \f(CW//\fP.
(Note that \f(CW/*\fP
may need to be quoted
to prevent shell expansion.)
Comments for unnecessary headers
are always printed.
.TP
.BR \-\-config \f1=\fPf "\f1 | \fP" "" \-c " f"
Specifies the path of the configuration file to use first.
.TP
.BR \-\-error \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-e " s"
When to exit with a non-zero status.
Valid values for
.I s
are:
.RS 8
.TP 12
.PD 0
.B always
Always exit with non-zero.
.TP
.B never
Always exit with zero.
.TP
.B violations
Only when violations.
.RE
.PD
.IP
This is needed to tell
.BR make (1)
that a corresponding \f(CW.o\fP file
has not been built.
(See
.BR "Use with Make" .)
The default is
.BR violations .
.TP
.BR \-\-line-length \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-l " n"
Specifies the line length.
The default is 80.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-config-layers " | " \-L
Suppresses configuration file layering.
(See
.B Layering
under
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILES" .)
.TP
.BR \-\-verbose \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-V " s"
Specifies what to be verbose about.
Valid values for
.I s
are:
.RS 8
.TP 4
.PD 0
.B a
Command-line arguments given to
.B include-tidy
and
.BR clang .
.TP
.B f
Source file being tidied.
.TP
.B i
Files included.
.TP
.B P
Configuration file proxies.
.TP
.B s
Symbols referenced
and the include files
declaring them.
.TP
.B S
Configuration file symbols.
.RE
.PD
.IP
Multiple values may be given,
one immediately after the other.
Alternatively,
\f(CW*\fP may be given to mean ``all''
or
\f(CW-\fP may be given to mean ``none.''
.SS Clang Options
Options that are neither one of
.B "Other Options"
nor preceded by
.B -Xtidy
are
.BR clang (1)
options
and are passed to
.B clang
(libclang)
verbatim.
.SS Other Options
These options are given directly as-is
since they would never be ambiguous
with
.BR clang (1)
options.
.TP 5
.BR \-\-help " | " \-h
Prints a help message
for command-line options
and exits.
.TP
.BR \-\-version " | " \-v
Prints the version number
and exits.
.SH CONFIGRATION FILES
An
.B include-tidy.toml
file is used to configure
.BR include-tidy .
The file is ``lite'' version of TOML.
(See
.B CAVEATS
for unsupported TOML.)
.SS Tables
The file is broken down into sections
(``tables'' in TOML parlance)
where each section is started by a line of the form:
.P
.RS 5
.RI [ table-name ]
.RE
.P
that is a left bracket,
a table name,
and a right bracket.
There must be
.I no
whitespace between the brackets.
If a table name
contains a character other than
a valid TOML key character of
\f(CW[A-Za-z0-9_-.]\fP
(a letter, digit, underscore, dash, or dot),
then the table name
.I must
be quoted.
.PP
The order in which tables are given
doesn't matter.
For the keys below,
a value
.I b
means Boolean
(either \f(CWtrue\fP
or \f(CWfalse\fP),
.I f
means a quoted file's relative path,
.I n
means an unsigned integer,
and
.I s
means a quoted string.
.SS include-tidy Table
This table
.I must
be named
.B include-tidy
and is used to specify options,
some the same as can be specified
via the command-line,
but without having to specify them
via the command-line
every time.
.TP 5
.BI add-c-includes " \f1=\fP " [ s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Like
.BR std-c-includes ,
but these are
.I additionally
to be considered ``standard'' C include files.
.IP
As the only special case to configuration file layering,
the include files given for
.B add-c-includes
are
.I cumulative
from all configuration files.
.TP
.BI align-column " \f1=\fP n"
Same as the
.B \-\-align-column
command-line option.
.TP
.BI all-includes " \f1=\fP b"
Same as the
.B \-\-all-includes
command-line option.
.TP
.BI comment-style " \f1=\fP s"
Same as the
.B \-\-comment-style
command-line option.
.TP
.BI line-length " \f1=\fP n"
Same as the
.B \-\-line-length
command-line option.
.TP
.BI std-c-includes " \f1=\fP " [ s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
One or more include files,
that are specified as a bracket-enclosed,
comma-separated
array of strings,
are to be considered ``standard'' C include files.
Globbing is supported.
These are used
when the source file
is either C or C++
(since C++ programs
can include C header files).
.TP
.BI std-cpp-includes " \f1=\fP " [ s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Like
.BR std-c-includes ,
but only for C++ include files.
.SS Header Tables
This type of table specifies
a relative path of an include file
(what you would put between either the \f(CW""\fP
or \f(CW<>\fP
in an \f(CW#include\fP directive),
e.g.,
\f(CWstdio.h\fP
or
\f(CWsys/wait.h\fP.
.TP 5
.BI first " \f1=\fP b"
If true,
the local include file given for the table name
is to be printed first,
i.e., before any other local include files.
This is useful when
.B all-includes
is \f(CWtrue\fP.
.TP
.BI keep " \f1=\fP b"
If true,
the include file given for the table name
is to be ``kept,''
that is,
even if no symbols from it are referenced
and so is apparently unnecessary,
it will not be reported as a violation.
.TP
.BI proxy " \f1=\fP s" "\f1 | \fP[" s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Specifies that the include file
given for the table name
is a ``proxy''
for one other include file
(that can be specified as a single string)
or one or more other include files
that are specified as a bracket-enclosed,
comma-separated
array of strings.
For example,
this:
.RS 5
.cS
[pjl_config.h]
proxy = [
    "attribute.h",
    "config.h"
]
.cE 0
.RE
.IP
says the header \f(CWpjl_config.h\fP
is a proxy for both \f(CWattribute.h\fP
and \f(CWconfig.h\fP
meaning that all symbols declared in either of those files
are considered declared in \f(CWpjl_config.h\fP instead.
Therefore,
if a source file includes \f(CWpjl_config.h\fP,
it does not need to include either of the files
for which it is a proxy.
.TP
.BR symbols " \f1=\fP s" "\f1 | \fP[" s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Specifies that the include file
given for the name table
is to be considered
to declare the given symbols.
.SS Symbol Tables
This type of table specifies a symbol name,
e.g.,
\f(CWNULL\fP
or
\f(CWsize_t\fP,
is declared in multiple include files
so including any one of them
meets the
.I include-what-you-use
requirement
thus averting a violation.
.TP 5
.BR includes " \f1=\fP s" "\f1 | \fP[" s " \f1[,\fP " s "\f1]*\fP ]"
Specifies that the symbol
given for the table name
is to be considered declared
in one or more
of the include files listed.
For example,
this:
.RS 5
.cS
[NULL]
includes = [
    "locale.h",
    "stddef.h",
    "stdio.h",
    "stdlib.h",
    "string.h",
    "time.h",
    "wchar.h",
]
.cE 0
.RE
.IP
says that \f(CWNULL\fP
is declared in
.I all
of those files
so including any
.I one
of them is sufficient.
.SS Locations and Search Order
One or more configuration files
can be used to configure
.B include-tidy
by reading them
on start-up.
The files are searched for
in the following locations
in order:
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step]. 3
The value of either the
.B \-\-config
or
.B \-c
option.
.IP \n+[step].
.B ./include-tidy.toml
.IP \n+[step].
The first of these files:
.RS 8
.TP
.PD 0
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/include-tidy.toml
.TP
.B ~/.config/include-tidy.toml
.RE
.PD
.IP \n+[step].
If the
.B XDG_CONFIG_DIRS
environment variable
is set to a colon separated list of paths,
then for each
.I path
in it,
the first of
.IB path /include-tidy.toml \f1.\fP
.IP \n+[step].
.B /etc/xdg/include-tidy.toml
.PP
If no configuration file is found,
it's an error.
.SS Layering
Every configuration file found is read.
Settings in files earier in order
take precedence over the same settings
in files later in order
with the only exception of the
.B add-c-includes
option.
For example,
if in
.B include-tidy.toml
in
.B ./
(the current working directory),
.B align-colum
is set to 35,
but in
.B include-tidy.toml
in
.BR /etc/xdg ,
it's set to 40,
then 35
(the value in the first file found in order)
will be used.
.PP
However,
if either the
.B \-\-no-config-layers
or
.B \-L
option is given,
then
.I only
the first configuration file found
is read.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.PD 0
.IP 0
No violations or the
.B \-\-error=never
option was given.
.IP 1
One or more violations.
.IP 2
No violations, but the
.B \-\-error=always
option was given.
.IP 64
Command-line usage error.
.IP 65
Source file has one or more errors.
.IP 66
Open file error.
.IP 69
Either could not invoke
.BR clang (1)
or get the current working directory.
.IP 70
Internal software error.
(Please report the bug.)
.IP 71
Operating system error.
.IP 74
I/O error.
.IP 78
Configuration file error.
.PD
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used to locate a configuration file in
.B ~/.config
only when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset.
If
.B HOME
is also unset,
the home directory is obtained from the password database entry
for the effective user.
If that fails,
no default configuration file
under the user's home directory
is read.
.TP
.B INCLUDE_TIDY_COLORS
This variable specifies the colors and other attributes
used to highlight various parts of the output
in a manner similar to the
.B GCC_COLORS
variable
used by
.BR gcc .
.IP
As with
.BR gcc ,
the value is composed of a colon-separated sequence of capabilities.
Each capability is of the form
.IR name [= SGR ]
where
.I name
is a capability name
and
.IR SGR ,
if present,
is a
``Select Graphic Rendition''
value
that is a semicolon-separated list of integers
in the range 0\-255.
An example SGR value is \f(CW31;1\fP
that specifies a bright red foreground
on the terminal's default background.
.IP
Capability names containing upper-case letters are unique to
.BR cdecl ;
those in all lower-case are upwards compatible with
.BR gcc .
.RS
.TP 13
.BI caret= SGR
SGR for the caret pointing to the error on the line above
(as with
.BR gcc ).
The default is \f(CW32;1\fP
(bright green foreground over current terminal background).
.TP
.BI error= SGR
SGR for the word ``error.''
The default is \f(CW31;1\fP
(bright red foreground over current terminal background).
.TP
.BI locus= SGR
SGR for location information in error and warning messages.
The default is \f(CW1\fP
(bold current foreground over current terminal background).
.TP
.BI warning= SGR
SGR for the word ``warning.''
The default is \f(CW33;1\fP
(bright yellow foreground over current terminal background).
.RE
.IP
The term ``color'' is used loosely.
In addition to colors,
other character attributes
such as bold, underlined, reverse video, etc.,
may be possible depending on the capabilities of the terminal.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_DIRS
If set to a colon separated list of paths,
then for each
.I path
in it,
the first of
.IB path /include-tidy.toml
to exist
and be readable
is used as the configuration file.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
If set to a path
of a directory
and
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/include-tidy.toml
exists and is readable,
then that used as the configuration file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/include-tidy
.PD 0
.TP
.B ~/.config/include-tidy
.TP
.B /etc/xdg/include-tidy
.PD
The configuration file.
.SH CAVEATS
.SS Unsupported TOML
The following parts of TOML are
.I not
supported
because they aren't needed
to configure
.BR include-tidy :
.sp
.PD 0
.IP \(bu 3
Array of tables.
.IP \(bu
Dates or times.
.IP \(bu
Floating-point numbers.
.IP \(bu
Inline tables.
.IP \(bu
Multi-line strings.
.IP \(bu
Unicode.
.PD
.SH AUTHOR
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clang (1),
.BR gcc (1),
.BR make (1),
.BR sysexits (3)
.\" vim:set et sw=2 ts=2:
